The Native Labour Regulations Act 1911 prohibited strikes by trade unions, introduced wage ceilings and a pass system for moving around jobs. Over 70,000 Chinese labourers were brought in, and used by landowners to undercut the wages of other workers. Among white workers, there was significant unrest, and major strikes took place in 1907, 1913, 1914 and 1922
For a period of sixteen years, from 1979 to 1995, several critical developments took place in the field of labour law in South Africa, beginning with a radical change in the first of these years, when a significant Commission of Enquiry was held, resulting in the establishment of an Industrial Court, which was given extensive powers to mould, change, shape and develop the law. Prior to 1995, most labour relations were based on contract. In 1995, much of the law developed by the Commission and the Industrial Court was put together in the Labour Relations Act 1995 (LRA). Since then, most labour law has been based on statute.
Prior to 1995, an employee could be dismissed in terms of the contract of employment, which could permit any reason for dismissal. Since 1995, an employee may be dismissed only for misconduct, operational reasons and incapacity. The Labour Reactions Act 1995 is a pivotal piece of legislation, as it recognises the need for fast and easy access to justice in labour disputes. The Industrial Court had the status of a High Court, and therefore was not accessible to all labourers.
1995 also saw the introduction of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) which is an administrative tribunal. The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration endeavours first and foremost to conciliate between the parties. If it is unsuccessful in this, the matter moves on to arbitration. The entire process is very informal, and at no charge, and is therefore very accessible to labourers, who often utilise it: About 300 new cases are brought before the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration daily. In addition to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, 1995 saw the introduction of bargaining councils, which allow for communication across the industry. A bargaining council is organised collectively and voluntarily, and must be registered. In order to be registered, an alternative-dispute-resolution mechanism, similar to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, must be put in place.
The Labour Reactions Act 1995 also regulated the issue of fairness, not only in termination but during employment, too. In 1998, however, most of the law on unfair labour practises was removed from the Labour Reactions Act 1995 and put into the Employment Equity Act (EEA). The Employment Equity Act also deals with issues such as fairness regarding a worker's human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status or disability, as well as the issue of affirmative action.
The Basic Conditions of Employment Act (BCEA), the Health and Safety Acts and the Skills Development Act, must be read with the Employment Equity Act. The Skills Development Act provides that a small percentage of a labourer's salary must be contributed to the Department of Labour, enabling certain workshops to be run which are designed to develop skills.
Finally, every trade union, employers’ organisation and employer has the right to engage in collective bargaining.
Section 23(1) is an unusual provision—only South Africa and Malawi expressly protect the right to fair labour practices—as it is so broad and overarching. An exact definition of fair labour practices is impossible, since this is a dynamic field of the law, rooted in socio-economic rights. Section 23(1) refers to "everyone," encompassing far more than merely employees and workers; it also includes would-be workers, employers and juristic persons.
Section 23 is not entirely universal, however, as soldiers are excluded from its ambit insofar as they may not strike at a time of war.
The Labour Relations Act was promulgated as the "national legislation" referred to in subsections 23(5) and 23(6), which provide respectively that "national legislation may be enacted to regulate collective bargaining," and that "national legislation may recognise union security arrangements contained in collective agreements." Both subsections stipulate that, to the extent that such legislation may limit one of the rights in section 23, the limitation must comply with section 36(1), the limitations clause of the Constitution.
The current Basic Conditions of Employment Act is also designed to give effect to the right to fair labour practices. Both Acts are bolstered by the Employment Equity Act, which replicates the equality clause in the Constitution in its totality, adding that one may not discriminate on the basis of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status.
The general guarantee of fair labour practices has far-reaching effects on the civil courts’ approach to the interpretation of the rights of parties to employment contracts.
All courts are enjoined, when applying and developing the common law, to have due regard to the spirit, purport and objects of the Bill of Rights. This calls for a reconsideration of some of the assumptions underlying the common-law contract of employment, in particular the employer’s power of command and unfettered rights in respect of promotion and dismissal.
Furthermore, the labour courts’ judgments on such contentious issues as the dismissal of striking workers are subject to review by the Constitutional Court, so long as the applicants have exhausted the procedures available to them under the labour legislation.
In NUMSA v Bader Bop,[2] the Constitutional Court overturned a decision of the Labour Appeal Court which restrictively interpreted the Labour Reactions Act 1995. The court recognised the necessity of collective bargaining and bargaining councils which facilitate the establishment of trade unions. The court held that minority unions may not strike in support of demands for organisational rights reserved in the Act for majority unions.
In NEHAWU v University of Cape Town,[3] the Constitutional Court overturned another decision of the Labour Appeal Court which restrictively interpreted the Labour Reactions Act 1995. It had been argued that the term "everyone" did not include a university or a company, but the court held otherwise. Furthermore, the court ruled that, under the original section 197 of the Labour Reactions Act 1995, contracts of employment transferred automatically when businesses were transferred, irrespective of the wishes of the employers.
SANDU v Minister of Defence,[4] another Constitutional Court, case Judge O’Reagan dealt with the concept of a "worker," and held that, although the Labour Reactions Act 1995 does not apply to South African National Defense Force (SANDF) members, they are still "workers" in terms of the Constitution, which protects the rights of every person in South Africa.
The first question to be asked, when seeking to resolve any labour law problem, is whether the parties are indeed "employees" and "employers" within the meaning of the applicable statute or the common law.
This has long since been a difficult task in South Africa, as it is not always immediately apparent whether the parties have entered into the locatio conductio operarum (contract of employment) or merely the locatio conductio operis (contract of work).
Distinguishing between these two kinds of contracts is critically important, as different legal consequences flow from the various forms of contract. Most important is the fact that South African labour legislation applies only in respect of employees, who are entitled to social security benefits and have access to the statutory mechanisms if they wish to seek remedies for violations of their employment rights. Similarly, only employers are bound by the labour statutes, and are vicariously liable for the delicts of their employees.
The first source to be examined, when seeking to determine whether parties to a work relationship are employers and employees, is the contract into which they have entered.
A contract of employment comes into existence when the parties conclude an agreement that conforms to the requirements of the locatio conductio operarum. The contract of employment is traditionally defined as "a contract between two persons, the master (employer) and the servant (employee), for the letting and hiring of the latter's services for reward, the master being able to supervise and control the servant’s work."
This, however, begs the question of how much supervision or control is required to distinguish between employees and independent contractors.
Reported judgments have indicated that the task of distinguishing employees and employers from parties to other contractual relationships entailing the provision of work, or the rendering of services, is not a matter of definition; classification of such contracts is a "matter of substance, not merely of form."
The true nature of the contract, therefore, is determined from the relationship between the parties, not merely the label the parties have given their contract.
The difference between the Labour Reactions Act 1995 and Employment Equity Act is that the former excludes independent contractors only in section 213(a), while the Employment Equity Act excludes independent contractors in both subsections. It is safe, however, to assume that, even from the second part of the definition of an "employee," as it appears in the Labour Reactions Act 1995 or the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, independent contractors are implicitly excluded.
At the core of subsection (a) of both definitions lies a reference to the contract of employment: one person working for another in exchange for some form of remuneration.
The basic idea behind subsection (b) of both definitions is that employees are those people who place their capacity to work at the disposal of others. This is the essence of employment.
The case of Liberty Life Association of Africa v Niselow reiterates the law set out above and the interpretation of the definition of "employee."
Labour legislation does not define "contract of service" or the concept of "work" at all.
This means that we must look outside the legislation to determine the meaning of these terms, if we are to address the difficult issue of distinguishing between an employee and an independent contractor.
In spite of the difficulties, the courts have formulated a number of tests for drawing the distinction.
The control test focuses on the element of "control" exercised by the employer over the employee.
The power to control has traditionally been regarded as the hallmark of the employment contract. With the advent of highly skilled employees who are given free rein in performing their duties, the courts no longer insist on de facto control, as once they did, but recognise that a right to control is sufficient.
The courts initially applied the requirement of a right to control rather strictly, as in R v AMCA Services, where the presiding officer spoke of "a right to control, not only the end to be achieved by the other’s labour and the general lines to be followed, but the detailed manner in which the work is to be performed."
It is now clear, however, that the courts have in mind a right to control only in principle. The fact that the employer does not choose to exercise that right does not render the contract something other than one of employment.
The application of the control test in isolation is entirely inadequate, as certain employees have a wide discretion as to how to perform their work. Such discretion does not alone render them independent contractors.
The ultimate difference between an employee and an independent contractor is that the principal has no legal right to prescribe the manner in which the independent contractor brings about the desired result, but may prescribe methods by which the employee works. In Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society v MacDonald, the court held that the employee was subject to the control of the employer in the sense that the latter had the right to prescribe not only what work had to be done, but also the manner in which that work had to be done. The independent contractor, on the other hand, could be directed only as to what work must be done, not how it was to be done.
In any event, to define a contract in terms of one of its characteristics is tautological.
The organisation test was developed in French law and adopted by South African law in R v AMCA Services and Another. It is based upon the assumption that whether or not one is an employment does not rest on submission to orders; it depends on whether the person is part and parcel of the organisation.
In other words, one looks at the extent to which a person (the worker) is integrated into the organisation of the other person (the employer), or whether the person is performing work inside the organisation of another.
The work of an independent contractor, although done for the business, is not integrated into it; it is only accessory to it.[5]
If a person is incorporated into or related sufficiently to the organisation, that person will be regarded as an employee or a worker even though the employer might exercise little actual control over him.
One of the problems with this test is that it is not always possible to measure the extent of integration, or to determine what degree of integration is sufficient for someone to qualify as an employee.
The test was rejected by the Appellate Division in S v AMCA Services on the basis of its being too vague.
The common-law concept of employment sets the scene for the interpretation of the Labour Reactions Act 1995.
The contract of employment is the foundation of the relationship between an employee and his employer. It links the two parties in an employment relationship, irrespective of the form the contract takes.
The existence of an employment relationship is the starting point for the application of all labour law rules. Without an employment relationship between the parties, the rules of labour law do not apply.
The origin of South Africa's modern contract of employment lie in Roman law, where a distinction was made between the two types of contracts discussed above: locatio conductio operis and locatio conductio operarum.
In terms of the common law, one does not have to have a written contract; therefore, not having the contract in written form is not a fatal flaw, as the contract can be verbal. There are, however, a number of statutes which require specific contracts of employment to be in writing. Section 29 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, for example, states that the employer must supply the employee with certain written particulars concerning specific things, like hours worked and remuneration.
Like any contract, the locatio conductio operarum commences when the parties have agreed to its essential terms, unless both parties have agreed to suspend its operation for a particular period. If the contract's operation is suspended, the employer is obliged to allow the employee to commence work on the specified date. Failure to do so, without good cause, constitutes a breach of contract at common law and a dismissal under the Labour Reactions Act 1995. It is important, therefore, to determine what the essentials of the contract of employment are.
Stripped to its essence, the contract of employment today may be defined as an agreement between two parties, in terms of which one party (the employee) works for another (the employer) in exchange for remuneration. Although this definition appears to be simple, it contains a number of important principles, aspects and implications. When they are taken into account below, the definition of the employment contract may be expanded as follows:
The contract of employment is a voluntary agreement between two legal personae (the parties) in terms of which one party (the employee) places his or her personal services or labour potential at the disposal of the other party (the employer) for an indefinite or determined period in exchange for some form of fixed or ascertainable remuneration, which may include money and/or payments in kind. This entitles the employer to define the employee’s duties and to control the manner in which the employee discharges them.
Firstly, it must be noted that the employment contract is based on agreement; the parties must enter into it voluntarily. This idea finds expression in section 13 of the Constitution, which provides that "no one may be subjected to slavery, servitude or forced labour," and section 48 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, which states that "all forced labour is prohibited."
Another implication of the fact that the employment contract is based on agreement is that it is a contract, and therefore must comply with the requirements of our law for a valid contract. If it does not comply with these requirements, it will not be regarded as binding and enforceable.
Consensus between the parties means that both must have a serious intention to create mutual rights and duties to which they will be legally bound. They must have each been fully aware of the nature of the duties, and that the other had this intention.
At common law, the parties are not required to observe any formalities. There is no requirement that the contract be in writing, but certain employment contracts are required by statute to be in writing, like those of merchant seamen and learners under the Skills Development Act. In addition, those of apprentices and candidate attorneys must also be registered with the appropriate authorities. Lastly, where parties wish to alter provisions of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, this must be done in writing.
Secondly, one of the pivotal concepts in the initial definition is that of work. Generally, to work means to place one’s labour potential at the disposal and under the control of another. This means that, when we work, we offer our services to another person, and agree that the other person will be able to tell us what to do, when to do it, how to do it and where to do it.
To place your labour potential at the disposal of another means to offer your ability to perform certain tasks to another person, and to offer, at the same time to follow that person’s instructions.
Remuneration normally takes the form of payment of money, or the provision of another benefit. (According to the common law, payment may be made in kind.)
Payment may be made monthly, weekly, daily or even in irregular cash payments. The common law does not prescribe what form payment must take.
The Labour Reactions Act 1995 contains a statutory definition of remuneration in section 213: "any payment in money or in kind, or both in money and in kind, made or owing to any person in return for that person working for any other person, including the State."
The contract may state that remuneration is the "normal going rate for a specific type of work," or state a specific amount or merely "minimum wage."
The common law does not indicate minimum wages; these are usually set by collective-bargaining councils and are industry specific.
The contract of employment is a reciprocal contract. This means that one promise is made in exchange for another, and one obligation is incurred in exchange for the other. The employee works in exchange for remuneration; the employer remunerates the employee in exchange for the employee offering to place his labour potential at the disposal and under the control of the employer.
In addition to the three principle duties of the employer, discussed below, employers are further obliged to accord employees their rights in terms of the applicable contracts of service, collective agreements and legislation, as well as to adhere to certain statutory duties imposed in the interests of employees.
The employer’s obligation to receive the employee into service is the corollary of the employee’s duty to enter and remain in service.
The duty to receive employees into service does not mean that employers must necessarily provide employees with work to keep them busy, although this general rule is subject to some exceptions: where, for example, remuneration is based on the volume of work done, as in the case of piece-workers or salespersons working on commission, or where the failure to allow the employee to work degrades his status. A duty to provide work may also arise where the employer has contracted to train the employee in a particular profession or trade, as in the case of article clerks and apprentices.
The common law permits the suspension of an employee, suspected of some form of grave misconduct, while the matter is being investigated, but the employee is entitled to his remuneration during the period of suspension.
Employers may deny their employees access to the workplace, or otherwise prevent them from working, in the course of collective bargaining. This is known as a "lock out," and is the employer’s equivalent of the employees’ strike. If a lock out is lawful—if, that is, it complies with the Labour Reactions Act 1995—the employer is relieved of its obligation to pay the locked-out employees their wages.
Since the contract of employment is personal, one employer cannot compel an employee to work for another if the first employer has no work for him, unless the first employer's business is transferred as a going concern.
This duty is so fundamental to the employment contract that the courts will assume, where there has been no agreement on remuneration, either that the contract is not a contract of employment, or else that the parties impliedly intended the payment of a reasonable sum according to the custom and practice of the industry and locality.
The duty to pay, and the commensurate right to remuneration, arises not from the actual performance of work, but from the tendering of service.
It has become a widespread practice for employers to make up remuneration "packages" for their higher-paid employees in a tax-effective way, by substituting various benefits (like housing and car allowances) for the cash component of the salary.
The periodicity of payment depends on the parties’ agreement or on custom.
An employer may not unilaterally deduct any amount from the remuneration to which an employee is entitled.
If the contract is terminated summarily for good cause, the employer must pay the employee for services rendered to the day of the dismissal. The same principle applies when the employee deserts mid-term before the end of a fixed-term contract or without proper notice.
Under the common law, employers are obliged to provide their employees with reasonably safe and healthy working conditions.
The scope of this duty extends to providing proper machinery and equipment, properly trained and competent supervisory staff, and a safe system of working.
If the employer fails to meet this obligation, affected employees are not in breach of contract if they refuse to work until the dangerous situation is corrected.
Under the common law, employees had to rely on delict if the employer did not ensure that the working conditions were safe and healthy, but this was viewed to be imprecise, and the Legislature intervened. The situation is now governed by the Occupational Health and Safety Act, which implements strict liability on the employer, and states how much must be paid to the employee if accidents occur.
If the breach is material, the employee may claim damages. Provided it is a material breach, the employee may also cancel the contract of employment.
The employee may also claim specific performance. This was seldom granted in the past but is now considered an option.
Finally, the employee may refuse to work, withholding labour until the contract is performed.
The main obligation of the employee under the contract is to place his personal services at the disposal of his employer.
The tender of service is a prerequisite to and the corollary of the employee’s right to claim payment of wages: "no work, no pay." The reverse also applies: "no pay, no work," so that employees who have not been paid may legitimately refuse to work without breaching their contracts.
If a number of workers engage in a concerted cessation of work for the purpose of obtaining some concession from their employer, they are deemed to be on strike. Under the common law, striking workers need not be paid. The common law also allowed employers summarily to dismiss striking employees, but this has since been changed by the Labour Reactions Act 1995.
Subject to the right to take such paid leave as has been agreed upon or conferred by statute, once employees have entered service, they remain obliged to render service until the contract of employment ends.
If the employee fails to render service (by desertion, absenteeism, abscondment, unpunctuality, etc.), the employer is entitled to deduct from the employee’s wage an amount proportional to the absence.
Employees are deemed by law to guarantee impliedly that they are capable of performing the tasks they agree to perform, and that they will carry them out with reasonable efficiency.
Where an employer seeks assurances about employees’ competence before taking them into service, the employees are bound by any representations they may make, whether those professions of competence are made by the employees themselves, or in testimonials of which they are aware.
The standard of competence employers are entitled to expect of their employees depends on the capacities in which the employees are engaged and the status and seniority accorded them.
The test for the standard of competence is that of persons comparable with the employees in question, having regard to training, experience and any special claims the employee might have made regarding his competence.
Where an employees has warranted that he possesses a particular degree of skill, he must satisfy that representation.
Employees are obliged to devote their energies and skills to furthering their employer’s business interests. They must devote all their normal working hours to the employer’s business; they may not, without the employer’s permission, simultaneously work for another employer during the hours they are contractually obliged to devote to their employer’s needs.
These duties arise because the relationship between the parties is of a fiduciary nature: Employees may not place themselves in positions where their own interests conflict with those of their employers and may not, by exercising their powers of agency, acquire interests or benefits without the knowledge of their employers.
Employees must maintain bona fides: They may not work for another if the other’s business interests are in conflict with those of the principle employer.
In the absence of a contrary provision in the contract, there is nothing to preclude employees from holding two compatible jobs, provided the second is not conducted during the working hours they are obliged to devote to the first job. Contractual provisions limiting employees’ moonlighting activities are, however, permissible.
In addition, employees may not compete with their employer’s business for their own account.
Respect and obedience are regarded as an implied duty of every employee. Absence of the former renders the interpersonal relationship between employer and employee intolerable; denial of the latter undermines the employer’s right to decide how its employees will work.
The courts require all employees to show a reasonable degree of respect and courtesy to their employers, and to obey their employers’ reasonable and lawful instructions.
Respect, being a disposition, is a quality that is difficult to define with precision. It is not to be equated with deference in a manner compatible with the subordinate position in which the employee by definition stands vis-à-vis the employer.
Mere failure on occasion to greet the employer or superiors will not place employees in breach of their obligation to show respect. Disrespect must be gross if it is to justify termination of the employment relationship, or so frequent as to suggest that the employee has repudiated the employer's lawful authority, or that it has rendered the continuation of the employment relationship "intolerable."
Each case must be considered on its own merits to establish whether these inferences may be drawn.
Unless insolence is particularly gross, the proper sanction is a written warning in the first instance.
The employee’s duty of obedience applies only to work-related orders and generally during working hours and to those orders which are lawful and reasonable.
Employees are also entitled to disobey instructions that would subject them to personal dangers not normally connected with the performance of their duties.
An order is unlawful if it requires the employee to perform an illegal act or to do something that falls outside the scope of the contractual relationship.
Any misconduct that renders the continuation of the employment relationship intolerable or unworkable, or undermines trust and confidence between employer and employee, is regarded as sufficient to justify dismissal, provided it is serious enough to offset the importance which the courts otherwise attach to the work security of employees. Examples of misconduct are insubordination, theft, fraud.
With regard to misconduct committed before the formation of the conduct (like the commission of a serious crime), the general principle is that there is no duty on prospective employees to disclose prejudicial information from their past to their future employers unless they are specifically asked to do so.
A duty may arise, however, where the non-disclosure is material and amounts to fraud. Whether or not an employee may be dismissed for non-disclosure depends on whether or not the employment relationship can reasonably be sustained after the discovery of the past misdeed.
The employer may only dismiss the employee summarily for misconduct, incapacity or operational reasons. If damages are incurred as a result of a breach of one of these duties, the employer may claim compensation.
The Basic Conditions of Employment Act is aimed at low-income earners: those who earn less than R89,000 per annum.
No matter what the contract itself says, the Basic Conditions of Employment Act is applicable as the minimum standard that must be achieved.
The Labour Reactions Act 1995 deals with strikes and unions and the like; the Basic Conditions of Employment Act is a fall back option for those vulnerable workers who are not able to unionize due to various reasons, such as the kind of work they do. Domestic and farm workers are pertinent examples in the South African context.
The purpose of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act is to advance economic development by providing basic conditions of employment.
The Basic Conditions of Employment Act also contains the definition of an employee, so that issue, discussed above, is relevant here, too. The Minister is empowered to extend the provisions of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act to non-employees in specific circumstances. Even, therefore, if a domestic worker is not considered an employee in terms of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, the Minister may extend the provisions to her for her own protection.
nitially the view was taken that only punitive suspensions fell within the scope of the "unfair labour practice," but this view was rejected by the Labour Court.
The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration follows the Labour Court's view and assumes jurisdiction over both punitive and preventative suspensions.
The practice of preventative suspension is not in itself unfair so long as there is substantive and procedural fairness when the employer takes this decision.
Substantive fairness in this context refers to the reason for the suspension. The employer must have a reason for believing that the suspension is necessary. This could be, for example, where the seriousness of the misconduct creates rumours and suspicion, necessitating a suspension of the employee in order for work to carry on smoothly, or where the employer has reason to fear that the employee in question may interfere with the investigation or the witnesses. It may also be that the employer fears another recurrence of the misconduct, or that the seniority and authority of the employee in question has a bearing on the matter.
Procedural fairness does not necessarily mean that the employee must be given a hearing before the suspension. At least, though, that the employer must inform him of the suspension, the reasons for it, and the conditions of the suspension.
As a general rule, the employer must continue remunerating the employee during the course of the suspension. If he were to cease remuneration, this would constitute a breach of contract.
Suspension without pay is generally only possible if the employee consents, or if this is provided by legislation or the contract of employment itself.
If the suspension is grossly unfair, the employee may seek reinstatement as a remedy.
Where the unfairness is less serious, the employee may seek an alteration of the conditions of the suspension or require that the employer hold a disciplinary hearing within a specified time.
Other disciplinary actions, like warnings, suspensions with or without pay, demotions and transfers, must also meet the requirement of fairness. The employer must be able to show that the warning, demotion or other disciplinary action was fair and appropriate in the circumstances.
The procedure for resolving unfair-labour-practice disputes is similar to the dispute resolution for unfair dismissals.
First, the dispute must be referred to a bargaining council (or the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration if there is no bargaining council) for conciliation.
If conciliation does not succeed, the matter may be referred to arbitration.
Unlike unfair dismissal disputes, unfair-labour-practice disputes are required, by section 191 of the Labour Reactions Act 1995, to be referred within ninety days of the relevant act or omission, or ninety days from the date on which the employee became aware of the act or occurrence.
In terms of section 193(4) of the Labour Reactions Act 1995, an arbitrator has the power to determine any unfair labour practice dispute on "reasonable terms," which may include ordering reinstatement, re-employment or compensation (of up to twelve months' pay).
The onus is on the employee to prove all the elements of the alleged unfair labour practice in question.
In this regard, the Code of Good Practice: Key Aspects of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and Employment, together with the Code of Good Practice on the Employment of People with Disabilities, provides guidelines on how HIV/AIDS and disability should be dealt with and accommodated in the workplace.
This is the only legislative provision that mentions human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status as a prohibited ground of discrimination. Its inclusion makes section 6 of the EEA even wider than section 9 of the Constitution.
Section 6 protects only an "employee," but it does not speak only of an employer; it provides that "no person" may discriminate. This is broader, and may include, inter alia, an independent pension fund or an independent medical aid scheme, or even a fellow employee.
In this regard, if an employee lodges a complaint of discrimination against another employee, and the employer does not consult in an attempt to eliminate the discrimination, the employer may be held liable.
The difference between discrimination and differentiation must always be kept in mind, as not all differentiations amount to discrimination. There may be a fair differentiation between employees on the basis, for example, of educational qualifications or experience or seniority.
Generally, differentiation will amount to discrimination if it is based on an unacceptable reason. Even if the discrimination suffered is not listed in section 6(1) of the EEA, it would amount to discrimination if, objectively, it is based on attributes and characteristics which have the potential to impair the fundamental human dignity of persons as human beings, or to affect them adversely in a comparably serious manner.
Once the employee has proven that there has been a differentiation, the EEA and Constitution provide that it is presumed to have been unfair discrimination. The employer then bears the onus of proving the differentiation to be fair.
The common law offered the employee virtually no protection against unfair dismissal. Before the Labour Relations Act[42] (LRA), as long as the employer gave the required period of notice, dismissal or probation was acceptable. The common law focused only on the lawfulness of the employment contract itself; the reason for the dismissal was irrelevant. The employer was not required to give the employee an explanation for the termination; nor was there any requirement that the dismissal be fair.
This had the effect of increasing the bargaining power of the employer, who could, essentially, do as he pleased, because of his more powerful position. The employer could threaten to dismiss the employee if the latter refused to accept less favourable terms and conditions of employment. The reason for this, it has been contended, is that, prior to 1980, this area of law was based on the incorrect assumption that there existed equal bargaining power between employer and employee.
Misconduct relates to the behaviour of the worker, usually involving some fault on his part, like insubordination, assault, theft, dishonesty, frequent late-coming or intimidation of co-workers.
Capacity relates to the worker's ability to do his job. It includes incompetence or incapability for medical reasons (ill health or injury). It is viewed as a no-fault dismissal.
Operational requirements relate not to the employee, but rather to the business enterprise of the employer. If an employee is dismissed on this ground, his is a no-fault dismissal. The most common form that this category takes is dismissal based on the economic needs of the business, or on the employer's need to restructure the organisation.
The Convention states further that employers must notify employees or their representatives that dismissal is contemplated, and must provide relevant information to them. The employer is obliged to consult regarding measures to minimise the number of dismissals, and also to mitigate the adverse effects of dismissal.
Summary termination by the employer may be justified if the employee has committed a serious or fundamental breach of a material term of the contract.
In CSIR v Fijen,[55] an employee and his employer had quarrelled during negotiations, with the employee declaring their relationship "finished," and the employer interpreting this as a resignation. The employee subsequently denied having resigned; what he meant, he argued, was that the working relationship had become intolerable. The court held that, in the absence of a clear and unambiguous intention to quit, there could not have been a proper resignation. The employer, therefore, was mistaken in its interpretation of his words.
There were indications, in Ouwehand v Hout Bay Fishing,[56] that the employee would be retrenched. Representations were made to him that he should find other work. He stopped going to work, therefore, on the assumption that he had been dismissed. The court, however, held that he had resigned, because the onus is on the employee to show that he has been dismissed. The employee in this case did not discharge that onus.
When dismissal may be effected is a question of some practical importance. It relates to the question regarding the commencement of employment: Does it commence when the contract is concluded, or rather when the employee starts working? The difficulty is that there may be a significant lapse of time between these two events.
The Labour Court held, in Whitehead v Woolworths,[57] that, to qualify as an employee, it was insufficient for the employee to prove that a contract of employment had been concluded. The conclusion of the contract merely gives rise to contractual claims; it does not confer the status of an employee or employer on the parties for the purposes of the Labour Relations Act. "In terms of the definition," Waglay AJ found,
a person is only an employee when such person actually works for another person. The employee must therefore have rendered a service to another which services are not that [sic] of an independent contractor. In addition to working for another the employee must also "receive" or be "entitled to receive" remuneration. The remuneration referred to must correspondingly mean remuneration for work done or tendered to be done.[58]
Two subsequent decisions of the Labour Court, in Jack v Director-General, Department of Environmental Affairs[59] and Wyeth SA v Manqele,[60] have taken a different approach.
The rights and remedies of a job applicant were considered in Jack, where the employer breached the contract by not allowing the party to commence work on the agreed date. The Labour Court, having examined the question of whether or not there was an employment relationship between the parties, decided that, once the parties have reached agreement on all the essential terms of the contract, it will be binding and enforceable.
In Wyeth, employer and employee had concluded a written contract on 15 March providing that the employee would commence work on 1 April. Before work commenced, the employer informed the employee that it was no longer prepared to employ him. The Labour Court held that the term "employee" in the Labour Relations Act encompasses a person who has concluded a contract to work, and that such person would also enjoy protection against unfair dismissal. This is in line with a purposive interpretation of the definition of "employee."
The employment relationship is wider than the employment contract. While the contract of employment is the foundation of the relationship, the relationship may begin before the employee commences working, and may endure for some time after the contract has been terminated. It ought also to be noted that, although abscondment by the employee constitutes a breach of contract, this by itself does not necessarily bring the contract to an end. Only when the employer accepts the employee's repudiation of the contract may it be said that there has been a dismissal.
In some cases, an employment relationship is terminated by neither the employer nor the employee, but by operation of law. This occurs, for example, when an employee's residence or work permit expires, and is sometimes called "automatic dismissal."
Section 187 of the LRA lists the reasons for which an employee may not be dismissed under any circumstances. Such dismissals are "automatically unfair." Once it is proved that the employee has been dismissed for any of these reasons, the employer may not raise any defence save those provided for in the Act. Victims of automatically unfair dismissals will invariably be reinstated unless they choose compensation instead.
Section 187(1)(d) is of particular importance. It designates as automatically unfair dismissals in response to the employee's taking action, or indicating an intention to take any action, against the employer by exercising any right conferred by the LRA, or by participating in any proceedings in terms of the LRA. Dismissal for any conduct regarding membership of a trade union, or for exercising the rights conferred by the labour legislation, is automatically unfair.
The rights referred to are found in section 5 of the LRA. They include lawful trade-union participation, non-compliance with an unlawful order and disclosure of information.[71]
In CEPPWAWU & another v Glass & Aluminium,[72] hostility from the employer in the workplace led to a constructive dismissal. The hostility was very closely related to the employee's work as shop steward. The court held that the employer had made the employee's life unbearable due to the fact that he was a shop steward; the dismissal was therefore automatically unfair. The court noted that victims of automatically unfair dismissal will invariably be reinstated unless they choose compensation instead.
Employers may lock out employees (provided that they follow the proper procedure) as a bargaining strategy. A lock-out does not constitute dismissal, as the employees are still employed by the employer.
The difficulty is that an employer may argue that he has the right to dismiss, for operational reasons, those employees who do not accept such a demand. It can be factually difficult in such cases to determine what was the true reason for the dismissal.
Section 187(1)(c) does not prevent employers from dismissing employees who refuse to accept a demand if the effect of that dismissal is to save other workers from retrenchment. Nor does this form of automatically unfair dismissal preclude an employer from dismissing a grossly insubordinate employee.
In Afrox Limited v SACWU & Others,[73] the company had a distribution system that resulted in its drivers working in excess of the overtime permitted by law. It decided to introduce a system of staggered shifts to overcome the problem. The employees, refusing to work under the new system, went on strike. They were subsequently dismissed for "operational reasons", as the deliveries from the branch that had been striking were outsourced. The employees contended that the real reason why they were fired was because they were on strike. The court held that, although the strike accelerated the dismissal, the workers did not comply with the Basic Conditions of Employment Act when they went on strike; therefore, regardless of the strike, the dismissal on operational reasons was upheld as fair.
In Fry's Metal v NUMSA,[74] the court held that the dismissal of employees who refuse to accept a demand does not infringe section 187(c) if the employer intends to get rid of the workers permanently. In this case, the dismissal was not in an attempt to force compliance; it had gone so far as to constitute operational reasons.
In CWIU v Algorax (Pty) Ltd,[75] Algorax had not formally declared a lock-out. The court held, therefore, that the employer had infringed section 187(1)(c), because it offered to reinstate the employees after dismissing them. Had Algorax formally declared the lock-out, it would seem that it could have kept the employees out for as long as it did without having to compensate them for unfair dismissal.
In retrenchment cases, it is difficult to decide when an employer is entitled to dismiss for insubordination when employees refuse to comply with instructions. One must distinguish between refusal to work and refusal to do work in the specific way required by the employer. A computer technician refusing to fix computers is refusing to work, but an employee refusing to use a particular computer programme is refusing to do work in a specific way.
If the employees are contractually obliged to perform the work demanded of them, and the employer's instructions are reasonable, the employees' refusal amounts to insubordination. It is not unfair to dismiss employees for refusing to comply with their employers' instructions to perform the work required by their contracts.
What if the employee refuses to carry out an order not in accordance with the contract, but with how the employer runs his business? This will depend on the facts: If the instructions are reasonable, such refusal could amount to insubordination.
In Kroukam v SA Airlink,[76] Kroukam was an airline pilot who doubled as a shop steward. He was dismissed after deposing to an affidavit for the purposes of an urgent application by his union to have the company's senior manager committed for contempt of court. He was charged with a number of offences, including gross insubordination. The company claimed that he had divulged the content of an off-the-record discussion in his affidavit, and also that he had refused to submit to a health test required of pilots. The Labour Court ruled that this was not an automatically unfair dismissal. On appeal, however, the court held unanimously that the main or dominant reason for Kroukam's dismissal was his involvement in litigation against the company. The court held, accordingly, that such a dismissal was indeed automatically unfair.
Section 187(1)(e) is one of a number of statutory provisions aimed at protecting women in employment. Prior to these types of provisions, a woman who left work to have a baby was largely at the mercy of her employer. Under the common law, her absence could be treated as a reason for termination of the contract.
Now, according to the EEA and the LRA, dismissal is unlawful if it is for any reason regarding pregnancy or discrimination on the ground of pregnancy. The employee has no duty to inform her employer that she is pregnant; the employer has no right to ask and demand an answer. Accordingly, a woman may not now be dismissed in any circumstances merely because she is pregnant.
Section 187(1)(e) also renders impermissible the dismissal of a woman on maternity leave (now up to four months under the new Basic Conditions of Employment Act).
Nothing precludes an employer from dismissing a pregnant employee for operational requirements, provided that the court can be persuaded that there was indeed a valid economic or related reason.
In Whitehead v Woolworths, the court held that an employer may have regard to economic considerations, including the woman's availability to perform her services, when considering whether to employ a pregnant applicant.
Section 187(1)(e) embraces any reason "related to her pregnancy." It therefore includes reasonable absences for medical attention and changes in the woman's physical configuration, which may dispose certain employers to fire employees engaged in certain types of work.
If the main reason for the dismissal is the employee's pregnancy, the employer may not rely on an ancillary reason like the employee's alleged deceit in not disclosing her condition. Conversely, a pregnant woman may not rely on her pregnancy as a defence against conduct that constitutes a disciplinary offence.
Mashava, in Mashava v Cuzen & Woods Attorneys,[77] was admitted as a candidate attorney at the firm. At the time of her employment, she was pregnant. She did not disclose this. The firm accordingly dismissed her, but the court held that this was automatically unfair. The employer could not rely on her deceit regarding her condition as a reason for dismissal.
Fair dismissals are composed of two golden threads: substantive fairness and procedural fairness. Both must be present in order for the dismissal to be fair and in accordance with the labour legislation. Employees may be dismissed fairly only for misconduct, incapacity and operational reasons.[78] Each of these has its own procedure, which must be followed.
Any person considering whether or not the reason for dismissal is fair, or whether or not the dismissal was effected in accordance with a fair procedure, must take into account any relevant code of good practice issued in terms of the Act.
Whether or not dismissal will be an appropriate sanction is a factual question. Item 3(5)-(6) of the Code lists factors to be taken into consideration. The employer should consider, in addition to the gravity of the misconduct, such factors as the employee’s circumstances (including length of service, previous disciplinary record and personal circumstances), the nature of the job and the circumstances of the infringement itself. The employer should apply the penalty of dismissal consistently with the way in which it has been applied to the same and other employees in the past, and consistently as between two or more employees who participate in the misconduct under consideration. All these factors must be considered and weighed up together to decide whether dismissal is justified or whether a less severe sanction would be more appropriate.
It has been submitted that, even if the commissioner does not consider dismissal to be the appropriate sanction after considering all these factors, the penalty of dismissal will stand if the commissioner or judge is satisfied that a reasonable employer could also have decided to dismiss under the circumstances.
In the case of Sidumo and Another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd and Others [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC), however, a security guard at a mine was not abiding by the search procedures he was obliged to employ for the workers at the mine. There was video footage available as proof that he was not adequately searching the workers. The security guard was dismissed on the suspicion that he could be fraternising with the workers in order to steal from the mines. The CCMA having held that this sanction was too harsh, the case was appealed to the Labour Court and then to Labour Appeal Court. When the case reached the SCA, the court held that employers have a discretion to dismiss. If the employer acts reasonably, his decision must be upheld.
On appeal to the Constitutional Court, it was held that the commissioner who hears the appeal must decide afresh if the decision was fair or unfair; therefore, it is not appropriate to look to the reasonable employer. The SCA approach, therefore, was found to be wrong. The test is what the reasonable commissioner would have done in those circumstances. The court, then, is not bound by the choice made by the reasonable employer. The "reasonable employer" test is no longer used.
Section 188(1)(b) of the LRA requires that a dismissal for misconduct must be effected in accordance with a fair procedure, which entails a fair disciplinary enquiry. The LRA does not regulate a fair disciplinary enquiry. The employer’s disciplinary code and procedure usually prescribes the procedure to be followed and the manner in which the hearing should be conducted. The Code provides a number of guidelines for a fair enquiry in item 4: This is not a substitute for a disciplinary procedure but merely a template by which the fairness of a dismissal must be judged.
Normally, the employer should conduct an investigation to determine whether there are grounds for dismissal. This does not need to be a formal enquiry. The employer should notify the employee of the allegations, using a form and language that the employee can reasonably understand. The employee should be allowed the opportunity to state a case in response to the allegations. The employee should also be entitled to a reasonable amount of time to prepare the response, and to the assistance of a trade union representative or fellow employee. After the enquiry, the employer should communicate the decision taken, and preferably furnish the employee with written notification of that decision.
Discipline against a trade union representative, or against an employee who is an office-bearer or official of a trade union, should not be instituted without first informing and consulting the trade union. If the employee is dismissed, the employee should be given the reason for dismissal and reminded of any rights to refer the matter to a council with jurisdiction or to the commission, or to any dispute resolution procedures established in terms of a collective agreement.
In exceptional circumstances, if the employer cannot reasonably be expected to comply with these guidelines, the employer may dispense with pre-dismissal procedures.
There was great debate regarding whether or not an employee’s incompatibility (his inability to work harmoniously with other employees or to fit in with the corporate culture of the undertaking or organisation) constituted incapacity or a ground for an operational-requirements dismissal.
Considering the way the LRA is now structured, this distinction has become vital. Different pre-dismissal procedures must be followed by the employer; disputes about an allegedly unfair dismissal would follow different procedures.
Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration commissioners now generally take the view that incompatibility constitutes incapacity and not operational requirements, but the debate continues.
There must still be a fair reason and fair procedure for such a dismissal. The employer is obliged to assist an employee who is causing disruptions in workplace relationship before dismissing him. If the employee is a genuine "misfit," appropriate warnings and counselling would be required.
It may happen that a call is made for the dismissal of an employee by a third party or co-workers. If this happens, the demand made must be "good and sufficient," and must be backed by a real and serious threat: for example, that the employees making the demand will go on strike if the employee in question is not dismissed. The employer must investigate alternatives and consult the employee in question.
The requirement that there must be no possible alternative is particularly true when racial or ethnic tension is the cause of the incompatibility. The test in such cases is that of necessity.
In many cases, the terms "incapacity" and "disability" are used interchangeably. Incapacity may be due to an accident causing a loss of limb or the slow onset of an illness like cancer or HIV/AIDS, or a person may have been born with a physical or mental impairment that others perceive as a disability.
The real issue in equity or anti-discrimination legislation is to protect the rights of disabled people, particularly in the area of employment, as employers may perceive a ‘disabled person’ to be unsuitable for the workplace.
Although the Constitution and LRA both have general equity provisions for people with disabilities, there is no statutory definition in these Acts. The EEA, however, defines people with disabilities as people who have a long-term or recurring physical or mental impairment which substantially limits their prospects of entry into, or advancement in, employment.
The Americans with Disabilities Act (arguably the most important international legislation in this field) defines a disabled person as "one who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, a person who has a past record of such an impairment, or a person who is regarded by other people as having such an impairment."
"Reasonable accommodation" means any modification or adjustment to a job or to the working environment that will enable a person from a designated group to have access to or participate or advance in employment.
A dismissal based on disability may thus be automatically unfair, giving the employer no defense and the judge no discretion—except that the dismissal may be fair if the reason is based on an inherent requirement of the job.
The employer will also bear the onus of proving that the dismissal for disability was based on the inherent requirements of the job and that the dismissal is both substantively and procedurally fair.
An employer may find itself facing financial ruin (due to unsound strategy, large clients or contracts having been lost, or factors in the economy at large). Under pressure, the employer may be forced into considering reducing its wage bill by restructuring the organisation, which may mean dismissing some employees. In this scenario, the word "retrenchment" is often used.
Section 188 of the LRA recognizes that an employer also has operational requirements and needs, and that, in certain cases, these may also be a fair and valid reason for dismissal.
According to section 213 of the LRA, "operational requirements" are requirements based on the economic, technological, structural or similar needs of an employer.
There are four categories of operational requirements. From these categories it is clear that the reason for the dismissal does not relate to the employee; it is due to the needs of the employer, and therefore reason for the dismissal is the employer's.
An employer’s economic needs, for example, include those needs and requirements relating to the economic well-being of the enterprise. One of the most common economic reasons for dismissal is financial difficulties (due to, for example, a downturn in the economy or a decrease in the demand for certain products).
"Technological needs" refers to the introduction of new technology, such as more advanced machinery, mechanization or computerization, leading to the redundancy of employees.
Structural needs as a reason for dismissal describes posts becoming redundant following a restructuring of the enterprise. This often follows a merger or amalgamation.
He proposed that the old system be retained. When this proposal was rejected by the employer, he resigned.
The court held that the employer had not acted unfairly, as a successful business requires contented employees. Unhappiness can lead to several problems, such as labour unrest and a drop in productivity. A commercial rationale for the changes was thus established by the employer.
Dismissal to compel an employee to accept changes to terms and conditions of employment is branded as automatically unfair by section 187(1)(c) of the LRA. The primary motive for dismissal must be a commercial rationale or operational reason in order for the dismissal to be fair.
The fundamental difference between an operational requirement dismissal and an automatically unfair dismissal is the employer’s reason for the dismissal. If an employer dismisses employees because the terms and conditions of employment must be altered for the business to continue being viable, the employees may be fairly dismissed, as they no longer serve the employer’s operational requirements.
A change in the terms and conditions of employment need not always be the result of changes regarding the business. The circumstances or attitude of the employee could change. This could have such serious economic repercussions for the employer that the latter deems it vital to change the employee’s conditions of employment.
The nature of a business may be such that special demands are made on the employees. It may be essential for the economic success of the business, for example, that the employees are able and willing to work overtime. The employee’s inability or refusal to do so could jeopardise the well-being of the business; therefore a dismissal would be fair.
The relationship between the employer and employee is one of trust. It entails the confidence that the employee is adhering to the common-law duty to act in good faith towards and in the best interests of the business.
If the facts show that this duty is breached, the employee is guilty of misconduct and, if sufficiently serious, may be dismissed.
If the employer is unable to prove such a breach on a balance of probabilities, the employee may not be dismissed for misconduct, but may be dismissed for operational reasons, as such mistrust is counter productive to the operation of the business.
In Food & Allied Workers Union v Amalgamated Beverage Industries, the Industrial Court accepted that the dismissal of a number of employees on suspicion of assault had an operational rationale to it.
Once it is established that s197 applies, one must consider the effect thereof. The four consequences of such a transfer are listed in section 197(2). These principles have far-reaching implications for the new employer, who may want to restructure the business and possibly retrench employees.
If the new employer decides to retrench employees, severance pay will be calculated on the basis of service with the old and new employer to determine the years of service.
Similarly, remuneration and benefits may be linked to years of service, which may also place a financial burden on the new employer.
Section 197 may also affect the freedom of the new employer to apply certain selection criteria in cases of retrenchment. In Keil v Foodgro (A Division of Leisurenet), Keil was first employed by MacRib and then by Foodgro, who bought MacRib as a going concern. Keil was employed in the same position by both employers. Foodgro sought to justify Keil's selection for retrenchment on the basis that it had applied LIFO, and that Keil's old contract was substituted with a new one when Foodgro bought the business. The court rejected this argument on the basis that section 197 provides for continuity of employment, so Foodgro should have taken Keil's service with MacRib into account. Foodgro's selection for dismissal was therefore fundamentally flawed. Keil was awarded nine months' compensation.
The new employer will also be expected to pay for the "sins" of the old employer. In NUMSA v Success Panelbeaters & Service Centre, an employee was unfairly dismissed by the old employer. The employee successfully challenged the fairness of the dismissal, the Labour Court ordering that the employee be reinstated. By this time, however, the old employer had sold the business as a going concern. The court held, accordingly, that the new employer was obliged to take the employee into service.
There are a number of additional principles relating to the consequences of a transfer.[79]
Should the new employer not adhere to its obligations to provide transferred employees with at least substantially the same conditions or circumstances at work, and should this lead to termination of the contract by the employee, it will be considered an automatically unfair dismissal according to sections 186 to 187 of the LRA.
The power play between employers and employees is clearly in evidence in the engagement of employer and employee through collective labour law. The LRA, together with other labour legislation, lays down basic rights and duties and remedies for ensuring fairness in the employment relationship. These are matters relating to the rights of employees and are accordingly known as "rights issues."[80] When it comes to creating new terms and conditions of employment—these are known as "interest issues" or "matters of mutual interest"[81]—or to changing existing terms, no legislation exists which explicitly regulates the situation. These issues, it is assumed, are better dealt with by the parties themselves. A court may not, for example, determine an annual increase for employees, or decide whether or not a crèche facility at the workplace is mandatory, or whether employees should be permitted to take Friday afternoons off. The reason for this is that "it is impossible to regulate these matters of mutual interest."[82] This is where collective bargaining comes into the picture.
The LRA recognizes the importance of collective bargaining and supports the mechanism:
If collective bargaining can be compared to a boxing match, the LRA can be seen as the organiser of the boxing match and the employers and trade unions are the boxers on opposite sides. The LRA provides the basic rules to protect the boxers both inside and outside the boxing ring. This is done, for example, by protecting the right of employees to form and join trade unions and to participate in their activities. This applies equally to employers who can form employers' organisations.[83]
Section 213 of the LRA defines a trade union as “an association of employees whose principal purpose is to regulate relations between employees and employers, including any employers’ organisation.” An employer organisation is defined as “any number of employers associated together for the purpose, whether by itself or with other purposes, of regulating relations between employers and employees or trade unions.”[84]
The LRA regulates the registration of trade unions and employers' organisations. It creates bargaining fora, such as bargaining councils and statutory councils, and guarantees the right to freedom of association. It also regulates organisational rights and strikes and lock-outs.
Once workers are organised in a registered trade union, and employers in an employers' organisation, the power play between workers and employers begins. Employees may try to force the employer's hand by way of strike action, while the employer ma exert pressure on the employees by way of a lock-out. It is accepted that strike action will result in a certain measure of economic handship for the employer. Provided that the strike has obtained protected status in terms of the law—in other words, is not prohibited, and the prescribed procedures have been followed—such economic hardship is considered to be part and parcel of the power struggle between employees and their employers: "In fact, this is the whole idea!"[85] The more the employer is hurt economically, the greater the chance that the strikers' demands will be met.
It is important to know when a strike or lock-out is protected, and when it is not, because that will determine the course of action and remedies for employers in the case of a strike, and for employees in the case of a lock-out.
The system in place up to the advent of democracy, "when South Africa was shaken to the roots by the transformation of the apartheid regime into a fully democratic constitutional order,"[88] was very fragmented. There were numerous definitional problems, too. Given the prominent role played by trade unions in bringing down apartheid, and given "the rapid and large-scale movement of former union leaders and cadres into party politics and government, it is hardly surprising that much attention was given to labour rights m the new dispensation."[89]
The right to fair labour practices, the right to bargain collectively and the right to strike were entrenched with a number of other fundamental rights in a new interim Constitution that came into force in 1993. Those rights remained entrenched in the final Constitution, adopted by the new democratic parliament on 8 May 1996. At that point, although all parties agreed that these fundamental labour rights should be given constitutional status (although there was some dispute about the extent of an employer’s right to lock out), there was room for disagreement on the scope and content of those rights. The final Constitution provided that "national legislation may be enacted to regulate collective bargaining."
"From this cue," writes John Grogan, "the government set about preparing legislation to give flesh to the bones of the constitutional guarantees."[90] The first step was to appoint a commission, under the chairmanship of Professor Halton Cheadle, to produce a draft Labour Relations Amendment Bill. This was accomplished six months later. The draft formed the basis of the new Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, which appeared in its current form after "intensive debate"[91] in the National Economic Development & Labour Council (NEDLAC), a body consisting of representatives of government, organised labour, and employers, including the Manpower Commission and the National Economic Forum. They started thrashing out a new framework, to deal comprehensively with both individual and collective labour law. Given the adversarial nature of the relationship between organised labour and employers up to that point,
this was a revolutionary development. Under the watchful eye of government representatives, and with their participation, management and labour were entrusted with the task of developing the draft bill into a uniquely South African product that at once satisfied the aspirations of labour and the reservations of management, and yet conformed to the letter and spirit of the Constitution and the requirements of the International Labour Organisation (ILO), of which South Africa was now a member.[92]
This produced the current LRA, "yet another turning point."[93] One of the hopes of the drafters was to change the adversarial stance which tended to be adopted by unions and management under the old dispensation to a more co-operative one. The LRA created new institutions for encouraging union-management cooperation, and revamped old ones, "in the hope this would help transform and mature attitudes and bargaining styles."
